--- PAGE 1 ---
UNIVERSAL CLOUD PRINT SYSTEM 
(UCPS) 
A Secure, QR-Based Smart Cloud Printing Platform for Legacy Printers 
Submitted To 
CSE Fest 2026 Software Project Showcase 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) 
Shanto-Mariam University of Creative Technology (SMUCT) 
Submitted By 
 
Name Student ID Role 
Wahidur Rahman [2026-2-60-046] Team Leader 
Maloy Roy Orko [2026-2-60-462] Backend Developer 
Intisar Muhib [2026-2-60-239] Frontend Developer 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) 
East West University (EWU) 
 
Date of Submission: June 2026 
 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Table of Contents 
The following table maps the required report sections specified in Section 12 of the CSE Fest 
2026 rulebook. 
Section 1: Title Page...........................................................Page 1 
Section 2: Abstract.............................................................Page 3 
Section 3: Problem Statement....................................................Page 4 
Section 4: Objectives...........................................................Page 5 
Section 5: System Architecture..................................................Page 6 
Section 6: Technologies Used....................................................Page 8 
Section 7: Key Features.........................................................Page 9 
Section 8: Implementation Details...............................................Page 10 
Section 9: Results & Evaluation.................................................Page 12 
Section 10: Challenges & Limitations............................................Page 13 
Section 11: Future Scope........................................................Page 14 
Section 12: References..........................................................Page 15 
 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Section 2: Abstract 
In modern academic and commercial environments, document printing remains a core 
administrative and educational necessity. Despite rapid advances in cloud computing, file 
transfer, and web technologies, the workflow surrounding physical document printing remains 
highly archaic, manual, and fragmented. Users routinely transfer files to print operators using 
temporary channels such as WhatsApp, Gmail, Facebook Messenger, Bluetooth, or physical 
USB storage devices. These methods introduce substantial operational bottlenecks, extend 
waiting times, compromise document privacy, and require high manual effort from printing staff. 
The Universal Cloud Print System (UCPS) is an innovative, centralized, cloud-based platform 
designed to modernize legacy printing services. UCPS enables users to securely upload 
documents from any internet-connected device (smartphone, tablet, laptop, or desktop) and print 
them on any registered physical printer via a quick QR code pairing mechanism. By acting as an 
intelligent middleware between the cloud database and local operating system print spoolers, 
UCPS eliminates third-party messaging dependencies, optimizes local network routing, and 
automates document execution without requiring any electronic hardware upgrades to existing 
legacy printers. 
To protect user privacy and system integrity, the platform implements a secure, multi-stage file 
validation pipeline. Uploaded files undergo MIME type verification, strict filename sanitization 
via randomized hashing, and placement inside a secure print buffer. Print jobs are placed in an 
intelligent queue governed by a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) scheduling algorithm and are 
automatically deleted from the server immediately after successful printing, ensuring compliance 
with data privacy standards. 
A quantitative evaluation of the system implemented in a simulated university campus 
environment demonstrated an average 60% reduction in user steps (from 5 to 2), an 83% 
reduction in operator actions (from 6 to 1), and a substantial decrease in average document 
transfer time (from 120–180 seconds down to 15–30 seconds). The results prove that UCPS is a 
highly viable, secure, and low-cost solution suitable for academic institutions, corporate offices, 
public libraries, and commercial print centers seeking to transition to smart, digital-first printing 
workflows. 
Keywords: Keywords: Cloud Printing, Smart Printer, QR Code, Queue Management, Document 
Security, FIFO Scheduler. 
 
--- PAGE 4 ---
Section 3: Problem Statement 
Imagine a common situation faced by many students and professionals. You are on your way to 
submit an assignment, print an official document, or attend an important interview. After 
reaching the printing shop, you suddenly realize that the required document was left on your 
home computer. In another case, the document is stored somewhere in your mobile phone, but 
finding it among hundreds of files takes several minutes. Sometimes the file has even been 
accidentally deleted or is no longer accessible. 
Even when the document is available, the printing process itself is often inconvenient. Users 
usually have to send their files through WhatsApp, Gmail, Messenger, or Bluetooth to the shop 
operator. This creates unnecessary delays and exposes personal documents to privacy risks. 
Sensitive files such as national ID cards, certificates, academic transcripts, photographs, or 
financial documents remain in the operator's messaging applications or email accounts, 
increasing the possibility of unauthorized access or misuse. 
Another common challenge is the long waiting queue in busy printing centers. Since users 
cannot monitor the print queue remotely, they are forced to stand in line until their turn arrives. 
At the same time, operators spend considerable time downloading files, opening different 
applications, configuring print settings, and manually processing each request, which reduces 
overall efficiency. 
Section 4: Objectives 
The primary objective of the Universal Cloud Print System is to develop a secure cloud-based 
platform that transforms conventional printers into smart printing devices without requiring 
hardware replacement. The specific goals the project aims to achieve are: 
• Direct Web Upload: Build a centralized web platform where users can log in, upload 
documents, and track their printing status. 
• QR-Based Pairing: Implement a QR code scanning interface that pairs a user's web session 
with a specific physical printer instantly. 
• FIFO Queue Management: Create a database-backed FIFO (First-In-First-Out) queue to 
schedule print jobs fairly and handle multiple requests concurrently. 
• File Validation and Security: Ensure high security by validating file size, verifying MIME 
types, and sanitizing filenames to block malicious uploads. 
• Print Automation: Develop a background queue worker that automates document dispatch 
to local print engines without human intervention. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
• Multi-OS Print Integration: Build cross-platform support for Windows (using SumatraPDF 
CLI) and Linux (using CUPS command-line utilities). 
• Automatic Document Cleanup: Protect user privacy by automatically deleting temporary 
files from the server's print buffer as soon as a print job completes. 
• Dual-Dashboard Interface: Design responsive dashboards for both users (to upload and 
monitor jobs) and operators (to monitor queue and printer status). 
• Zero Hardware Overhead: Deliver a hardware-independent system that runs on existing 
legacy printers, eliminating the need for expensive hardware upgrades. 
Section 5: System Architecture 
The Universal Cloud Print System operates on a client-server architecture model. The client 
layer is entirely web-based, enabling any device with a modern browser to access the system. 
The server layer manages authentication, printer status, file uploads, and queue scheduling. The 
printing layer is hosted on a local machine physically connected to the printers, running a 
background service that polls the server for jobs and executes them using native command-line 
printing tools. 
5.1 System Architecture Layers 
The system architecture is divided into three key layers to ensure scalability and clear separation 
of concerns. The structure and components of these layers are mapped in the table below: 
System Layer Key Modules / Components Role & Protocols 
Presentation Layer (Client Browser) Web Browser Interface 
(HTML5/CSS3/JS), Web QR 
Scanner, File Upload Drag-and-Drop 
Area 
Provides the user interface for 
authentication, pairing, and document 
submission. Communicates via 
HTTPS. 
Application Layer (Web Server) Authentication Module, Print Job 
Queue Manager, Upload Validator, 
MySQL 8.x Database 
Processes client requests, validates 
file integrity, saves documents to 
secure print buffer, and maintains 
queue state. 
Execution Layer (Print Node) Background Queue Worker 
(PHP/Python polling script), OS 
Spooler (SumatraPDF on Windows, 
CUPS on Linux) 
Polls the server for jobs, downloads 
files from the print buffer, silent 
prints to physical printers, and 
handles cleanups. 
 
--- PAGE 6 ---
5.2 Data Flow Design (DFD) 
Data flows securely through the system to prevent unauthorized access. The following tables 
map the inputs, outputs, and processes at both Level-0 (Context level) and Level-1 (Process 
level) DFD representation: 
Level-0 DFD Table: Level-0 DFD Table (System Context Diagram Mapping) 
Source Entity Data Input to UCPS Data Output from UCPS 
User / Client Device User login credentials, Printer QR 
code ID, Printable document file 
(.pdf/.png/.jpg) 
Authentication status, Printer paired 
confirmation, Real-time queue status, 
Print job completion notification 
Physical Printer Raw print commands and formatted 
document data dispatched by host 
spooler 
Printer status updates (Online, Busy, 
Out of paper, Offline) 
 
Level-1 DFD Table: Level-1 DFD Table (Process Interaction Mapping) 
Process Name Inputs Outputs Data Stores Accessed 
1.0 User Authentication Login credentials (email, 
password) 
Auth token, User session 
info 
Users Database Table 
2.0 Printer Pairing Printer QR Code ID Session paired state Printers Database Table 
3.0 Document Upload Printable file, paired Printer 
ID 
Job ID, Saved file in buffer Print Jobs Table, Print 
Buffer (FS) 
4.0 Queue Processing Job metadata, physical file Print job dispatch to 
spooler 
Print Jobs Table, Print 
Buffer (FS) 
5.0 Print Spooling Print command Physical printed document OS Spooler / Printer 
Spooler 
6.0 File Cleanup Completion confirmation Temporary file deletion, 
job state set to Completed 
Print Jobs Table, Print 
Buffer (FS) 
 
5.3 Overall System Workflow Diagram 
The step-by-step sequence of operations from user authentication to automatic document 
deletion is represented in the native diagram flowchart below: 
Step 1: User logs in to the UCPS Web Application 
▼ 
Step 2: User scans printer QR Code or selects location from manual shop 
directory 
▼ 
--- PAGE 7 ---
Step 3: System pairs session to the selected Printer ID 
▼ 
Step 4: User uploads the PDF or Image document via HTTPS 
▼ 
Step 5: PHP backend performs binary validation and MIME check 
▼ 
Step 6: System calculates dynamic BDT cost based on file page counts 
▼ 
Step 7: User executes payment via bKash Checkout API or selects Cash option 
▼ 
Step 8: File is renamed with a secure hash and placed in secure buffer 
▼ 
Step 9: If Cash payment, Operator physically collects cash and approves job 
▼ 
Step 10: Job is released in database queue for polling worker (Pending status) 
▼ 
Step 11: Background Queue Worker locks and pulls oldest Pending job using 
FOR UPDATE 
▼ 
Step 12: Queue Worker sends silent print command to OS Spooler 
(SumatraPDF/CUPS) 
▼ 
Step 13: Physical printer prints document and server erases temp file from 
buffer 
 
Section 6: Technologies Used 
The Universal Cloud Print System is designed as a lightweight, cross-platform web application 
with a decoupled printing backend. To ensure maximum compatibility and zero license costs, 
open-source and native operating system technologies are selected: 
• HTML5, CSS3, and JavaScript: Used to construct the client dashboard interface. 
Responsive layout handles mobile browsers and desktop environments seamlessly. No third-
--- PAGE 8 ---
party heavy Javascript frameworks are required, ensuring extremely fast load times on public 
networks. 
• PHP 8.x (Backend): The primary server-side logic processor. It handles multipart/form-data 
file uploads, authentication sessions, file metadata validation, and REST API routing. 
• MySQL 8.x (Database): Relational database to maintain print queues, printer nodes, and 
user accounts. Atomic transactions are utilized to handle simultaneous print jobs. 
• SumatraPDF CLI (Windows Spooler Client): A lightweight, open-source PDF viewer for 
Windows systems. It is integrated into the Windows Print Node to execute sessional PDF 
prints from the command-line silently. 
• Common UNIX Printing System - CUPS (Linux Spooler Client): The native UNIX print 
subsystem utilized in Linux print nodes. It receives print requests directly from our 
background worker via lp command line parameters. 
Section 7: Key Features 
The Universal Cloud Print System (UCPS) implements several features designed to optimize 
user convenience, operator efficiency, and data security: 
• QR-Based Printer Pairing: Users scan a unique QR code attached to a physical printer. 
This instantly binds their active web session to that printer, removing any manual selection 
error. 
• Manual Printer Directory Search: For client devices without working camera units, users 
can search a location-based directory of active print shops and manually bind their session to 
a selected printer. 
• Dynamic Cost Calculator: The system parses uploaded files to count pages and estimates 
print job costs dynamically in BDT (5 BDT per page) before processing payment. 
• Dual Payment Gateways (bKash & Cash): Integrates bKash payment gateway API for 
instant online transactions, and a manual cash option where operators approve print jobs after 
receiving cash physically. 
• Asynchronous FIFO Print Queue: Print jobs are handled asynchronously. The web server 
immediately stores files and returns a success response to the user, who can exit the page. 
The background queue worker takes care of spooling without human intervention. 
• Multi-stage File Security: Uploaded files undergo binary check validation to prevent 
malicious uploads, and filenames are replaced with unique secure hashes to prevent directory 
traversal. 
--- PAGE 9 ---
• Immediate Post-Print File Erasure: The system automatically deletes documents from the 
server buffer immediately after a print job completes. No files are stored permanently, 
safeguarding privacy. 
• Dual Role-based Dashboards: Separate, responsive interfaces tailored for users (to upload 
and track files in real-time) and print operators (to monitor spooler queues, approve cash 
transactions, and toggle printer states). 
Section 8: Implementation Details 
8.1 File Security Pipeline 
Accepting file uploads from public users presents potential security risks. To protect the server 
and printer hosts, UCPS uses a strict security pipeline for every uploaded file. The sequential 
steps of the security pipeline are represented in the flowchart below: 
Step 1: User Upload Request (file size checked; restricted to PDF, PNG, JPG, 
JPEG) 
▼ 
Step 2: Session Validation (checks authentication state of user session token) 
▼ 
Step 3: Binary MIME Verification (uses PHP's finfo_open to inspect file 
header) 
▼ 
Step 4: Filename Hashing (replaces file name with a unique randomized SHA -
256 hash) 
▼ 
Step 5: Secure Storage (moves file to print buffer directory with script 
execution disabled) 
▼ 
Step 6: Queue Registration (logs job metadata in database; status set to 
Pending) 
▼ 
Step 7: Asynchronous Execution (background worker pulls file data safely) 
▼ 
Step 8: Secure Deletion (removes file from disk immediately after spooler 
confirmation) 
--- PAGE 10 ---
 
8.2 Print Spooler Integration 
The background print node translates web-based print requests into commands that the physical 
printer understands. This is implemented differently depending on the host operating system: 
Windows Spooler Integration (SumatraPDF CLI) 
Windows systems typically lack built-in command-line tools that reliably print PDF and image 
formats without displaying a user interface. To achieve silent printing, the Windows Print Node 
utilizes SumatraPDF CLI, a lightweight, open-source PDF viewer. 
Command Format: When the background worker detects a print job, it downloads the PDF file 
and executes the following command silently: 
SumatraPDF.exe -print-to-default -silent 
"C:\print_buffer\temp_job_8fa31e.pdf" 
The `-print-to-default` argument directs the document to the system's primary printer, while the 
`-silent` flag runs the process in the background without opening a viewer window. 
Linux Spooler Integration (CUPS) 
Command Format: Linux systems utilize the Common UNIX Printing System (CUPS) to 
manage physical printers. CUPS provides robust command-line utilities out of the box. When a 
job is detected, the Linux Print Node executes the native `lp` command: 
lp -d HP_LaserJet_Pro_400 -o fit-to-page 
/tmp/print_buffer/temp_job_8fa31e.pdf 
Here, `-d` specifies the targeted printer, and `-o fit-to-page` scales the document to the printable 
area of the paper, preventing formatting issues. 
8.3 Asynchronous Queue Worker & Concurrency 
Database Lock: To prevent race conditions—such as two print nodes downloading and printing 
the same job—the system uses database-level locks. The worker retrieves and locks the oldest 
pending job using an atomic transaction: 
START TRANSACTION; 
SELECT job_id, filename FROM print_jobs  
WHERE status = "Pending" AND printer_id = "PRN001"  
ORDER BY upload_time ASC LIMIT 1 FOR UPDATE; 
UPDATE print_jobs SET status = "Printing" WHERE job_id = [selected_job_id]; 
COMMIT; 
--- PAGE 11 ---
The `FOR UPDATE` clause locks the selected row, preventing other processes from modifying 
it until the transaction completes. This guarantees that each print job is executed exactly once, 
even during high-traffic periods. 
8.4 Integrated Billing & bKash checkout API flow 
To commercialize and sustain the cloud printing infrastructure, UCPS integrates an automated 
billing and payment pipeline. The system calculates the job cost dynamically based on document 
parameters using a page extraction library on the server side: Cost = PageCount * Rate (e.g. 5 
BDT per page). 
Users can complete payment using two options: online mobile banking via the bKash API, or 
cash at the print counter. The status of payment is tracked in the database print_jobs table via the 
payment_status column, which has states: 'Unpaid', 'bKash_Paid', and 'Cash_Approved'. 
When the user selects bKash payment, the client dashboard interacts with the bKash tokenized 
checkout REST API. The workflow is represented as follows: 
• 1. Payment Creation: Web Server issues a request to the bKash API to create a payment 
request (Create Payment API) with the calculated BDT amount. 
• 2. Secure Checkout: bKash returns a secure gateway checkout URL; the web app renders 
this within a secure iframe/modal overlay where the user enters their wallet number. 
• 3. Authentication: The user enters a one-time OTP and their secure 5-digit PIN directly to 
bKash servers. 
• 4. API Callback & Release: bKash redirects to the callback API on the web server 
(executePayment). The server validates the transaction hash, updates the job state's 
payment_status to 'bKash_Paid' in the database, and releases the job to the spooler queue. 
If the user selects the cash option, the job is queued immediately, but its status remains locked as 
'Unpaid' and the background queue worker bypasses it. The operator dashboard displays a 
distinct 'Pending Payment' alert. Once the operator physically receives the cash from the user, 
they click the 'Approve Payment' button on the operator console. This triggers an API call that 
updates the database state to 'Cash_Approved', immediately releasing the job into the printer 
queue. 
Section 9: Results & Evaluation 
To evaluate the functionality and reliability of the Universal Cloud Print System, the platform 
was tested in a simulated campus environment with multiple concurrent users and various file 
formats. The results of these test cases are summarized in the table below: 
--- PAGE 12 ---
Test Case Input/Action Expected Result Status 
User Authentication Valid/invalid credentials Allow login for valid users, 
reject invalid ones 
Passed 
QR Code Pairing Scan printer QR code Pair user session with the 
correct printer ID in the 
database 
Passed 
Standard PDF Upload 1.5 MB PDF Document Validate, rename, store in 
buffer, and add to print 
queue 
Passed 
Image Upload PNG and JPG images Verify MIME type, accept 
file, and add to queue 
Passed 
Invalid File Upload Executable file (.exe) Reject file upload and 
display security error 
message 
Passed 
FIFO Scheduling 3 concurrent uploads Process print jobs in the 
exact order of their upload 
timestamps 
Passed 
Printer Offline Handler Queue job while printer is 
offline 
Keep job status as Pending 
and retry once printer 
reconnects 
Passed 
File Deletion Cleanup Print job completes Verify document is 
permanently deleted from 
server print buffer 
Passed 
 
9.2 Quantitative Performance Evaluation 
The performance of UCPS was compared directly against the traditional WhatsApp/Gmail-based 
printing workflow. The results show a clear improvement in efficiency and security across all 
measured metrics: 
Evaluation Metric Traditional Printing Workflow Universal Cloud Print System 
(UCPS) 
User Steps Required 5 steps (open chat, select file, send, 
wait in line, instruct operator) 
2 steps (scan QR code, upload 
document) 
Operator Steps Required 6 steps (open app, download, locate 
file, open file, configure print 
settings, print) 
1 step (ensure printer has paper/ink 
and monitor queue) 
Average File Transfer Time 120–180 seconds (varies based on 
network, download speed, and 
messaging delays) 
15–30 seconds (direct cloud upload 
and automatic spooling) 
Queue Visibility None (users must wait in a physical 
queue to see printer status) 
Available (real-time queue status 
visible on the user dashboard) 
--- PAGE 13 ---
Document Privacy Low (files remain on public 
computers and operators' messaging 
accounts) 
High (documents are automatically 
deleted from server after printing) 
Remote Printing Support Not supported (requires physical 
proximity or sharing accounts) 
Supported (users can queue 
documents remotely from anywhere) 
Multi-User Support Limited (causes bottlenecks and 
operator confusion) 
Fully supported (handles multiple 
uploads concurrently) 
 
Section 10: Challenges & Limitations 
Although the implementation was successful, several technical and logistical challenges were 
addressed during development: 
• Print Spooler Access Permissions: The web server must run with appropriate 
administrative permissions to access the operating system's native print spooler. Secure 
configurations are required to ensure the server can control printers without creating security 
risks. 
• Document Formatting and Compatibility: PDF and image formats are printed directly, but 
editable formats (such as `.docx` or `.pptx`) can experience formatting changes if printed 
without the source application. To resolve this, future versions will include a server-side 
conversion tool (such as headless LibreOffice) to convert all documents to PDF before 
sending them to the printer. 
• Network Dependency: Because UCPS is a cloud-based platform, a stable internet 
connection is required for document upload and queue synchronization. Under offline 
conditions, print requests cannot be registered. 
Section 11: Future Scope 
The current implementation serves as a Minimum Viable Product (MVP). To build a fully 
featured, enterprise-grade platform, several enhancements are planned for future versions: 
• Mobile Applications: Develop native Android and iOS applications to provide a faster 
mobile experience and push notifications. 
• Institutional Single Sign-On: Connect the system with University Single Sign-On (SSO) 
systems to allow students to log in using their institutional credentials. 
• Load Balancing: Build a multi-printer load balancer that automatically routes jobs to the 
least busy printer in a lab to optimize queue speeds. 
--- PAGE 14 ---
• Raspberry Pi Print Node: Utilize a low-cost Raspberry Pi as a dedicated print node, 
allowing standard USB printers to connect to the cloud without requiring a dedicated PC. 
Section 12: References 
• The PHP Group. 'PHP Manual: File Uploads and Filesystem Functions.' Available: 
https://www.php.net/manual/ 
• Mozilla Developer Network (MDN). 'Using files from web applications.' Available: 
https://developer.mozilla.org/ 
• Common UNIX Printing System (CUPS). 'CUPS Command-Line Printing.' Available: 
https://www.cups.org/documentation.html 
• Microsoft Developer Network. 'Windows Printing Architecture and Spooler API.' Available: 
https://learn.microsoft.com/ 
• SumatraPDF. 'SumatraPDF Command Line Arguments for Silent Printing.' Available: 
https://www.sumatrapdfreader.org/ 
• OWASP Foundation. 'OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks.' Available: 
https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/ 
• SMUCT Department of Computer Science & Engineering. 'CSE Fest 2026 Software Project 
Showcase Rulebook.' 
